if you've been watching this channel
since the beginning you'll remember I
always used to come on camera and say if
I look exhausted it's because I am
exhausted I'm back in the day and still
now today being the example I always
used to come online and make videos when
I was too tired to do other more serious
work things that I cared about and today
is no exception or today is an example
of that old rule what used to be the
norm around here I woke up at 6:45 in
the morning I had to go down to the
train station it's a long story
and this evening when I had this guy
here hilariously repairing the
electricity in my bathroom I was talking
about the stuff and joking about it on a
live stream on you-now with a great
audience we had a great time we really
just hung out for like two hours
wonderful and you know a couple of
trolls showed up but everyone was having
such a good time the trolls also got
into the spirit of things and had a good
tent too so it's really a beautiful
beautiful experience we had a lot of fun
and then I went to the gym and now I'm
talking you again for that same
fundamental reason I feel too tired to
really hit the books to really get
something done intellectual otherwise
best it sounds worse the times so this
is me on four hours of sleep people um
ah take me as I am or let me go um look
this video the topic which you've
already seen in the title is a topic
that people requested and I'm happy to
comply and put up this video I will
decide later whether this video is going
to be up temporarily or permanently
because as you may have heard me say
many times this channel just like saying
if I look exhausted cuz I am exhausted
another thing I've said many many times
is that I always like to make videos
that will still be meaningful to other
people and will still be meaningful to
me personally if I came back and watch
them ten years from now you know
something that's not just meaningful a
short term not just to go to controversy
of the day
so we'll see how this goes umm-hmm the
question of this one vegan on the
internet eating cheese and not caring
about eating cheese and expressing his
indifference laughing about it etc
raises all kinds of issues and some of
them are issues that I've already
discussed with them face to face in
person and sorry face to face via Skype
you know in the custom the interview to
have he and I have talked about the
difference between the man of principle
model where you stand up for the
principle of the thing whether or not
you can see the meat whether or not you
can taste the cheese whether or not you
ordered it whether or not you asked for
it whether or not the principle the
thing is more important or versus I
suppose the go-with-the-flow model of
being a flexitarian or semi vegan so
there's a sense in which you guys
already know where I stand however I
think a lot of you will find the content
of the remainder of this video a little
bit surprising and hopefully a lot
enlightening um my first university
degree is in political science I'm not a
specialist in Afghanistan I'm not a
specialist in Iraq however anyone who
seriously dressed in politics in the
last 20 years has to some extent
developed an interest in places like
Afghanistan and Iraq and I actually was
interesting that part of world before
September 11 2001 partly just because of
the particular professors I had in the
particular university program where I
studied political science I read an
account once of one of these bizarre
public education programs that the
United States supported in Afghanistan
and this was an education program not
aimed at children blamed at adults and
trying to change some fundamental
religious social and cultural attitudes
toward women toward education toward the
way societies organized and so this
program was addressing things like
arranged marriage an arranged marriage
in that culture partly it means the
question of whether or not a woman has
the right to choose her own husband as
opposed to having her father choose her
husband for her but partly it also deals
with child marriage versus adult
marriage so people being married at too
young an age partly it deals with
inbreeding with whether not people
they're cousins etc and this programs
education program that was really
engaging local religious leaders in
debate local kind of village elders in
debate the local equivalent of the mayor
leaders of public opinion behind the
other big question was of women's
education and they were trying to engage
these people in debate many of whom were
members of the Taliban um and other you
know some were not members of the
Taliban were extremely conservative
Muslims and trying to within an
extremely fundamentalist and somewhat
fanatical a social setting trying to
convince them that their own religion
their own culture really did not call
for women to be kept illiterate forever
for women to for women to be unable to
choose their own husbands etc etc so
that was a very careful argument for
them to advance the people doing this
the reality is they're employees of the
American government so they have a very
obvious agenda it's very obvious who's
paying the bills and why the whole
public education program is this but
they were trying to debate with these
people
on their level within the Muslim
religious schema and in many cases for
in many cases they say they won how
effective was the program really I have
no opinion but I'm reading this article
that's describing the program as a
success and there's a very interesting
moment of reflection in this program
where one of these men I think he wasn't
he's some kind of village elder just a
respected older gentleman in a village
in Afghanistan um he asked the question
he said look I know how these things
were done in my grandfather's time I
know these things were done in my
father's time but I know how we did them
in this village just ten years ago and
he referred to his own family situation
exactly these issues arranged marriage
women's education versus women's
illiteracy and he said how do we know
when to make the change when the reality
of the change were making he is an
offense to our own grandparents is an
offense to our own tradition is an
offense to our own culture and own way
of doing things just five years ago just
ten years ago and of course
a hundred years ago and so on and the
answer that was given by the local
religious leader this is a Muslim cleric
who had very gradually been convinced by
this basically American propaganda
program the answer he was given is the
obligation to make the change comes as
soon as we know before we were ignorant
there was no obligation on us to do the
right thing because we did not know as
soon as we know we have to make ginger
interesting now there was more to it
there's a whole context of Islamic
jurisprudence Islam as a religion Muslim
culture ah but the simplicity of that
being tied to of course a monotheistic
and totally non democratic worldview to
me of course it was just it's just a
moment that stays with me it's a moment
that leaps off the page in contrast to
the sort of ethical debates we engage in
within veganism animal rights ecology
and within democratic forums shall we
say as soon as you know there's the
obligation to make the change doesn't
matter what your parents believe what's
your grandparents believe so many of you
watching this are vegans who already
sympathize with why I raised this many
of you are vegans who will have had
conflicts with your own parents or with
your own grandparents some of you just
recently at Thanksgiving some of you in
the next thirty days are gonna go to
Christmas or Hanukkah you're gonna deal
with those exactly those questions in
some sense and you are not going to be
able to get away with presenting an
ethical argument that simple in that
simplistic so you know we all go through
these situations where you order
something in a restaurant you think it's
vegan it arrives and it's not when is
the obligation on you to act as soon as
you know I go through these things in
many languages of reading ingredients
and sometimes reading ingredients very
carefully the ingredients are written in
English the ingredients are written in
Chinese the ingredients are written in
Thai or Cambodian or some other
languages have lived in all these
strange countries sometimes I buy things
and I don't know they contain some kind
of animal product the obligation of me
to act comes as soon as I do know right
very simple um so I digress for more
anecdote here I have really two big
anecdotes in mind but here's a little
one in the middle if you think it
doesn't make a positive impact in the
world it does there was a bakery in
Victoria British Columbia Canada
Victoria is a small city and it was a
so-called artisanal bakery which just
means it's expensive so I mean some of
the loaves of bread in this bakery are
five dollars probably some of them are
like seven dollars the bread could be
very pricey they tried to make different
types of fancy bread and I would go in
and I would have to ask every time is
this bread vegan and they didn't know
they the only way that could find out
whether or not a particular bread on a
particular day was really vegan was for
them to phone the Baker who did the work
that day because they mixed up their
recipes so like on a given day a certain
that bread might or might not have egg
wash on it or might might or might not
have some parmesan used in it or might
or might not have some other non vegan
ingredient they really didn't know I
guess again this is part of their
artisanal style they don't want to be
like a corporate bakery I'm guessing
they encourage their bakers that you
have to mix it up a little bit from day
to day or week to week to make things
you know a little bit unpredictable um
now I didn't punish them sometimes when
I ask this question it's okay is this
can i buy this bread or not you know I'm
vegan you know can you check sometimes
the result was that with buy nothing now
we have to leave the store empty-handed
so we move it sometimes I would just
have to buy the cheapest plain white bun
which they made they made a simple what
we call a dinner roll to have a very
simple white bread because that was the
only thing I was really certain was
vegan
their loss so they're selling me a 50
cent bun or a couple of 50 cent buns
instead of a $5 loaf of bread this is
these are Canadian prices and in
Canadian cities
sadly it's very common to steal hope of
bread for five dollars and with Canadian
dollars Canadian prices um okay and you
know the last time I talked to them
because this happened repeatedly the
last time I talked to the woman who was
the boss I know she was the manager of
the owner but she was some kind of boss
she just said to me she said look you
know what we need to be better organized
because whenever we get these questions
of course whether it's from a vegan or
maybe it's from someone who's just
lactose intolerant you know someone who
has another reason we never really
answer so you know what I gotta talk to
the chef we got a we got to get
organized so we have a written list
every day about what is there isn't so
great it's a small change in the world
but if I had behaved like this other
youtuber and just pretended I didn't
know or didn't care if I just blindly
ate bread that had cheese in it and
wasn't different in that small way I
wouldn't make the world a better place
and of course this type of conversation
is part of the difference between
veganism being a visible minority or an
invisible minority which is very
important I'm not going to get into that
at length here at the top of that above
many videos I think part of the dynamism
and strength of the gay rights movement
was that gay people made a transition
from being an invisible minority to
being a visible minority a highly
visible minority it's possible if you're
gay most gay people can pretend to be
straight they keep they can choose to be
invisible right but that I mean the
difference between homosexuality in the
1930s and homosexuality in the 1990s a
big part of it was the transition from
being invisible to being visible so yes
being vegan in a visible way just in
that small way of when you go to the
bakery sing look I got a check I think
this bread is vegan but is it obviously
you don't ask that about bread that has
that's labeled as bacon bread or you
press that about bread that's labeled
labeled as cheese loaf but sure with
bread that could be or should be or
might be vegan
it's totally reads blessed and engage in
that and you are making that small
difference um you know now look sorry I
up by blood I'm Jewish I think I I I
think I could tell I could lie and not
be Jewish I've met and talked to Jewish
people who are religious
I'm an atheist I'm a nihilistic atheist
and for them all so that's part of the
reason for them to go into shops and
check does this contain pork is this
kosher for them to talk to people and
shouts of their desert roles it's partly
because they want the shop owners to
know we're out here we're not an
invisible community or visible community
were some of your customers we're
looking to buy this stuff like whether
that's a labeling challenge or an
ingredient challenge some of them want
to do that now fundamentally I don't I
don't sympathize with any supernatural
dietary requirements I don't I don't
sympathize with them within Judaism
North and Buddhism nor any other
religion but I just say that's an
interesting parallel where again there's
a question of visible versus invisible
and a question of very polite gradual
suasion on those institutions whether
there are restaurants or bakeries or
what-have-you
right there's still an activism folks
this has just living your life this is
just normal daily life this is just the
struggle as a vegan right activism is a
whole nother question part of the reason
why this channel exists is not just to
talk about the politics of veganism not
just to talk about the irrational
elements of veganism but to talk about
the emotional elements and indeed the
irrational elements okay keeping all the
way real now I've got a disclaimer here
I'm gonna say it after the anecdote also
I do not support or endorse violence of
any kind I don't support violent
protests I don't support I don't support
any of the excuses for violence made by
other vegans such as Gary Yourofsky I do
not support violence even against
laboratory technicians who perform
experiments and animals not at all I
only endorse democratic nonviolent
methods of social Trains especially if
you're living in a democratic country
such as kin of the United States Germany
etc um I don't know if anyone watching
this channel is really living in a non
democratic country maybe a few but most
of my advice is being addressed to
people who really have the right to vote
and Lobby government and go to City Hall
and organize dissident movements etc if
you live in a country where you have
none of those rights and none of those
options that's probably another story
and somebody has to talk about it on
their YouTube channel um with that
haven't been said there was a guy and
I'm not gonna say who he was and I'm not
gonna say where I was I am going to lie
and say that this happened in Malaysia
it did not but we're gonna pretend it
happened in Malaysia cuz I want to make
this story more anonymous okay there was
a guy and I had been a friend to him and
he had been a friend to me at one point
I had invited him into my own house
and I him as a house guest he had met my
girlfriend time I had cooked food for
him in the past I had been a host him
take care of him and at one point in
Malaysia he was a host to me and I did
not speak the local language I couldn't
communicate in Malay and he knew how
seriously I took vegetarianism at the
time so at the time I was strictly
vegetarian I wasn't yet vegan I've
talked about that in earlier videos but
you know the process of me becoming
vegan that time already though I've
refused to wear leather refused to eat
eggs in many ways I was very very close
to vegan in my ethical beliefs and in my
diet but I was not at that time on a
person fee but he knew how serious it
was that he said that he was a
vegetarian he was serious with
vegetarianism also that's what he said
and not once but repeatedly he went with
me to a grocery store and he bought for
me a type of bread and this is basically
like a bread with herbs like a focaccia
type of bread so as a bread with some
some flavoring some herbs on it I
couldn't taste anything taste like it
had any egg in it it didn't taste like
it had anything there was no cheese
so whatever non-vegan aparts it
absolutely seemed to be vegan to me
right and he went with me the first time
and he explained what was he talked to
the woman behind the counter and the
local language and he confirmed yeah oh
yeah this is totally great and he said
he had a idea he ate it himself all the
time and he was vegetarian okay so I
didn't see him for a while I don't know
let's say for so I he I ate it a couple
of times with him for that reason this
bread from this particular store and
then I didn't see him for a week let's
say
these are approximate times during that
week I did a couple more times and that
I did see him again and when he saw that
I bought it he laughed at me and I could
tell from his laughter something was
wrong he was like oh you still buy this
stuff I was like yeah it's like you know
it's because it's the bread you
confirmed was you know vegan vegetarian
whatever I want to say like this is the
bread safe for me to buy because you
talk to the person I can't speak the
language here you know and you know
while he was talking to me I was eating
the bread and he laughingly and casually
said that in fact this bread contained
beef contained beef tallow and the
moment he said that the moment I knew I
spat out the bread that was in my mouth
I put the bread down I never hated again
and now it must be a trace amount and
actually in his whole story heat in his
laughing way he told this whole story
that no actually he when he asked the
one behind the counter she admitted or
she stated that it contains some trace
amount of beef tallow of I assume beef
fat and again it was so little I really
can taste most impurities so I assume it
is really a tiny amount of beef but it's
the principle of the thing and again my
purpose on this channel is to keep it
all the way real and talk about
emotional and irrational aspects of
veganism and when I put that bread down
I was sitting there looking at him I
didn't feel angry I felt cold and I was
thinking through completely rationally
whether or not I was gonna murder this
guy now some of you may say that's
irrational again I don't enforce endorse
violence for any political purpose I
don't I don't work in my violence in
your life well it was rational and I
came to the rational conclusion that I
was not gonna kill him I just have the
level of honesty
to come on camera and tell you I thought
that all the way through and the
situation we were living in in Malaysia
again not really Malaysia I could have
done it very easily and I would have
gotten away with it if there wouldn't
have been any problem in that sense in
terms of law enforcement not an issue
not an issue I will digress just to say
for me personally there has to be
extraordinary circumstances to use
violence against someone but the most
ordinary of those extraordinary
circumstances for me from my perspective
is that this person is not just a threat
they're an ongoing threat or in other
words if you don't use violence to stop
them they're not just gonna cause a
problem for you now they're not just
threats you know they're gonna continue
to be a problem they're gonna continue
to instigate violence or do something
else very seriously wrong in the world
again and again to others or possibly to
you again or what have you where
violence is necessary to stop violence
and again I actually sorry this is
obviously this is totally unscripted
spontaneous video I don't even like the
word necessary where your reason for
using violence is to stop further
violence / thats basically the only
situation in which I would be able to
convince myself of that sort of thing so
as I said it's very extraordinary that's
the most ordinary of extraordinary
circumstances that I couldn't achieve it
that kind of thing again even in the
comments below this video
even in anonymous comments I don't know
how many people are willing to come
forward and say yeah when someone
crosses you like that when someone
intentionally lies to you when someone
makes a mockery out of the moral
principles you choose to live your life
by that you think through whether or not
you're gonna kill them when somebody
doesn't just cross that line but they
trick you into crossing that line
this is really the opposite of this
other youtuber who just has the relaxed
attitude have let it all hang out and
who sits he sits down the rest unlike me
he sits down in a restaurant he orders
something it turns out it has cheese on
it and he just laughingly in a relaxed
way eats the cheese well I guess the
advantage of his approach to life is
that it doesn't cross his mind the
things that crossed my mind I now again
being asked you I got it under control I
have never had a single violent outburst
that kind in my entire life I doubt I
ever will I'm now 38 years old um I have
talked to other vegans who do not have
an under control I have talked to vegans
who get into fist fights over
trivialities there are vegans who lose
their temper and I can sympathize but
sure I'm here to say it's bad and it's
wrong so the vegan who laughingly just
eats cheese when it's convenient to eat
cheese because they don't want to make a
fuss it's bad and it's wrong but I've
also got to say living the way I live
this whole man of principle thing it's
not for everybody because some people
are gonna snap and that also is bad and
it's wrong hit me up